MARCUS AURELIUS ANTONINUS THE ROMAN EMPEROR
HIS FIRST BOOK
concerning HIMSELF:
Wherein Antoninus recordeth, What and of whom, whether Parents, Fch thou

hast observed in any of them that live with thee:
as industry in one, in another modesty, in another bountifulness,
in another some oth thou have them always in a readiness
THE FIRST BOOK
I. Of my grandfather Verus I have learned to be gentle
and meek, and to refrain from all anth a spare diet,
and to fly all such excess as is incidental to great wealth.
Of my great-grandfather, both to frequent public schools
and audite circus,
called Prasini, and Veneti: nor in the amphitheatre partially to

favour any of the gladiators, or fencers, as either the Parmularii,
t vain things,
and not easily to believe those things, which are commonly spoken,
by such as take upon them to work wonders, and by sorcerers,
oto apply
myself unto philosophy. Him also I must thank, that ever I heard
first Bacchius, then Tandasis and Marcianus, and that I did write
dialthat my life wanted some redress and cure.
And then, that I did not fall into the ambition of ordinary sophists,
either to write tracts concernif rhetoric and poetry, and of
elegant neat language. That I did not use to walk about the house
in my long robe, nor to do any such things. Moreas any of them
would be content to seek unto me again. To read with diligence;
not to rest satisfied with a light and superficial knowledge,
norfastness,
and not to regard anything at all, though never so little,
but right and reason: and always, whether in the sharpest pains,
or after this scholars and auditors in his lectures and expositions;
and a true pattern of a man who of all his good gifts and faculties,
least esteemed i not become obnoxious unto them,
for them, nor more yielding upon occasion, than in right I ought;
and yet so that I should not pass them neitheriends, not to be offended with idiots,
nor unseasonably to set upon those that are carried with the
vulgar opinions, with the theorems, and tented and reverenced:
who also had a proper happiness and faculty, rationally and
methodically to find out, and set in order all necessary
determi and yet almost without any noise, or rumour:
very learned, and yet making little show.
Vii. From Alexander the Grammarian, to be un-reprovable en spoken; or by some other such close and indirect admonition,

handsomely and civilly to tell him of it. VIII. Of Fronto,
to how much envy and necessity
to say, or to write to any man in a letter, 'I am not at leisure';
nor in this manner still to put off those duties, which we owe
to all my masters upon
any occasion, as it is reported of Domitius, and Athenodotus:
and to love my children with true affection.
XI. From my brothinistered by justice and equality;
and of a kingdom wherein should be regarded nothing more
than the good and welfare of the subjects. Of him alwhom I moreover observed open dealing towards those whom
he reproved at any time, and that his friends might without
all doubt or much observatinesses:
to love mildness, and moderation, and gravity: and to do my business,
whatsoever it be, thoroughly, and without querulousness.
Whatsoeveme unseemly, or excessively to laugh: nor to be angry, or suspicious,
but ever ready to do good, and to forgive, and to speak truth;
and all thihan he.
He would also be very pleasant and gracious.
XIII. In my father, I observed his meekness; his constancy
without wavering in those things tending
to any common good: how generally and impartially he would
give every man his due; his skill and knowledge, when rigour
or extremity, ordinary meals,
nor that they should of necessity accompany him in his journeys;
and that whensoever any business upon some necessary
occasions warch of the matter,
as one easy to be satisfied with sudden notions and apprehensions.
His care to preserve his friends; how neither at any timet, without any noise or clamour.
Moreover how all acclamations and flattery were repressed by him:
how carefully he observed all things necessarser of men,
or studious of popular applause; but sober in all things,
and everywhere observant of that which was fitting; no affecter
of novelti present; so when absent, he found no
want of them. Moreover, that he was never commended by any man,
as either a learned acute man, or an obseqere not so;
his sociableness, his gracious and delightful conversation,
but never unto satiety; his care of his body within bounds
and measure, ously he would yield to any that
had obtained any peculiar faculty, as either eloquence,
or the knowledge of the laws, or of ancient customs,
orrs, yet even of this was he not desirous
that men should take notice, that he did imitate ancient customs.
Again, how he was not easily moved anconcerned public matters:
his discretion and moderation, in exhibiting of the public
sights and shows for the pleasure and pastime of the people;
never curious, or solicitous, either about his meat,
or about the workmanship, or colour of his clothes,
or about anything that belonged to exise, all things distinctly, as at leisure;
without trouble; orderly, soundly, and agreeably. A man might have
applied that to him, which is recon either estate,

is proper to a man, who hath a perfect and invincible soul;
such as he showed himself in the sickness of Maximus.
XIV. From thion was such, as that such a thing
(if occasion had been) might very well have been committed by me,
but that It was the mercy of the gods, to put it off longer than I needed.
That I lived under the government of my lord and father,
who would take away from me all pride and vainglory, ant that a man may reduce
and contract himself almost to the state of a private man, and yet
for all that not to become the more base and remiss i, and that they
were not born distorted, nor with any other natural deformity.

That I was no great proficient in the study of rhetoric and poetd that I did not put them off with hope and expectation, that
(since that they were yet but young) I would do the same hereafter.
That I ever knns, helps and inspirations, as might be expected
from them, nothing did hinder, but that I might have begun long
before to live according to natnly cause of it.
That my body in such a life, hath been able to hold out so long.
That I never had to do with Benedicta and Theodotus, yea and
a all her latter years. That as often as I had a purpose
to help and succour any that either were poor, or fallen into
some present necessity, I able men, to whom I might commit
the bringing up of my children. That by dreams I have received help,
as for other things, so in particular, how spent my time either in reading
the manifold volumes of ordinary philosophers, nor in practising
myself in the solution of arguments and fallachis day I shalt have to do
with an idle curious man, with an unthankful man, a railer,
a crafty, false, or an envious man; an unsociable unchariodious and shameful:
who know moreover, that this transgressor, whosoever he be,
is my kinsman, not by the same blood and seed, but by participae?
for we are all born to be fellow-workers, as the feet, the hands,
and the eyelids; as the rows of the upper and under teeth:
for such therefo thy books, suffer not thy mind any more
to be distracted, and carried to and fro; for it will not be;
but as even now ready to die, think littlan hour
let out, and sucked in again. The third, is thy ruling part;
and here consider; Thou art an old man; suffer not that excellent
part to b